DOCSUP-12128: Data encryption on VFS level (#27362)
ClickHouse/ClickHouse: docs/en/operations/storing-data.md

## Zero-copy Replication {#zero-copy}

ClickHouse supports zero-copy replication for `s3` and `HDFS` disks, which means that if the data is stored remotely on several machines and needs to be synchronized, then only the metadata is replicated (paths to the data parts), but not the data itself.

> ## Using HDFS for Data Storage {#table_engine-mergetree-hdfs}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuring HDFS {#configuring-hdfs}
```

[HDFS](https://hadoop.apache.org/docs/r1.2.1/hdfs_design.html) is a distributed file system for remote data storage.

[MergeTree](../engines/table-engines/mergetree-family/mergetree.md) family table engines can store data to HDFS using a disk with type `HDFS`.

Configuration markup:

``` xml
<yandex>
    <storage_configuration>
        <disks>
            <hdfs>
                <type>hdfs</type>
                <endpoint>hdfs://hdfs1:9000/clickhouse/</endpoint>
            </hdfs>
        </disks>
        <policies>
            <hdfs>
                <volumes>
                    <main>
                        <disk>hdfs</disk>
                    </main>
                </volumes>
            </hdfs>
        </policies>
    </storage_configuration>

    <merge_tree>
        <min_bytes_for_wide_part>0</min_bytes_for_wide_part>
    </merge_tree>
</yandex>
```

Required parameters:

-   `endpoint` — HDFS endpoint URL in `path` format. Endpoint URL should contain a root path to store data.

Optional parameters:

-   `min_bytes_for_seek` — The minimal number of bytes to use seek operation instead of sequential read. Default value: `1 Mb`.

> ## Using Virtual File System for Encrypt Data {#encrypted-virtual-file-system}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using Virtual File System for Data Encryption {#encrypted-virtual-file-system}
```

> You can encrypt the data and save it on [S3](../engines/table-engines/mergetree-family/mergetree.md#table_engine-mergetree-s3) or [HDFS](#table_engine-mergetree-hdfs) external disks or a local disk. To do this, in the configuration file, you need to specify the disk with the type `encrypted` and the type of disk on which the data will be saved. An `encrypted` disk ciphers all written files on the fly, and when you read files from an `encrypted` disk it deciphers them automatically. So you can work with an `encrypted` disk like with a normal one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can encrypt the data stored on [S3](../engines/table-engines/mergetree-family/mergetree.md#table_engine-mergetree-s3), or [HDFS](#table_engine-mergetree-hdfs) external disks, or on a local disk. To turn on the encryption mode, in the configuration file you must specify the disk with the type `encrypted` and the type of disk on which the data will be saved. An `encrypted` disk ciphers all written files on the fly, and when you read files from an `encrypted` disk it deciphers them automatically. So you can work with an `encrypted` disk like with a normal one.
```

``` xml
<yandex>
    <storage_configuration>
        <disks>
            <disk_s3>
                <type>s3</type>
                <endpoint>http://minio1:9001/root/data/</endpoint>
                <access_key_id>minio</access_key_id>
                <secret_access_key>minio123</secret_access_key>
            </disk_s3>
            <disk_memory>
                <type>memory</type>
            </disk_memory>
            <disk_local>
                <type>local</type>
                <path>/disk/</path>
            </disk_local>
            <disk_s3_encrypted>
                <type>encrypted</type>
                <disk>disk_s3</disk>
                <path>encrypted/</path>
                <key id="0">firstfirstfirstf</key>
                <key id="1">secondsecondseco</key>
                <current_key_id>1</current_key_id>
            </disk_s3_encrypted>
            <disk_local_encrypted>
                <type>encrypted</type>
                <disk>disk_local</disk>
                <path>encrypted/</path>
                <key>abcdefghijklmnop</key>
            </disk_local_encrypted>
        </disks>
    </storage_configuration>
</yandex>
```

Required parameters:

> -   `type` — `encrypted`. Otherwise, the encrypted disk is not created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `type` — `encrypted`. Otherwise the encrypted disk is not created.
```

-   `disk` — Type of disk for data storage.
-   `key` — The key for encryption and decryption. Type: [Uint64](../sql-reference/data-types/int-uint.md). You can use `key_hex` parameter to encrypt in hexadecimal form.

>     You can specify multiple keys using the `id` attribute (see example).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You can specify multiple keys using the `id` attribute (see example below).
```

Optional parameters:

> -   `path` — Path to the location on the disk where the data will be saved. If not specified, the data will be saved to the root of the disk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `path` — Path to the location on the disk where the data will be saved. If not specified, the data will be saved in the root directory.
```

> -   `current_key_id` — The key is used for encryption, and all the specified keys can be used for decryption. This way, you can switch to another key, while maintaining access to previously encrypted data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `current_key_id` — The key used for encryption. All the specified keys can be used for decryption, and you can always switch to another key while maintaining access to previously encrypted data.
```

> -   `algorithm` — [Algorithm](../sql-reference/statements/create/table.md#create-query-encryption-codecs) for encryption. Can have one of the following values: `AES_128_CTR`, `AES_192_CTR` or `AES_256_CTR`. By default: `AES_128_CTR`. The key length depends on the algorithm: `AES_128_CTR` — 16 bytes, `AES_192_CTR` — 24 bytes, `AES_256_CTR` — 32 bytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `algorithm` — [Algorithm](../sql-reference/statements/create/table.md#create-query-encryption-codecs) for encryption. Possible values: `AES_128_CTR`, `AES_192_CTR` or `AES_256_CTR`. Default value: `AES_128_CTR`. The key length depends on the algorithm: `AES_128_CTR` — 16 bytes, `AES_192_CTR` — 24 bytes, `AES_256_CTR` — 32 bytes.
```

Example of disk configuration:

``` xml
<disks>
  <disk1>
    <type>local</type>
    <path>/path1/</path>
  </disk1>
  <disk2>
    <type>encrypted</type>
    <disk>disk1</disk>
    <path>path2/</path>
    <key>...</key>
  </disk2>
</disks>
```

> For example, when ClickHouse writes data from some table in the form of a file `store/all_1_1_0/data.bin` to disk1, then in fact this file will be written to the physical disk along the path `/path1/store/all_1_1_0/data.bin`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, when ClickHouse writes data from some table to a file `store/all_1_1_0/data.bin` to `disk1`, then in fact this file will be written to the physical disk along the path `/path1/store/all_1_1_0/data.bin`.
```

> When writing the same file to disk2, it will actually be written to the physical disk at the path `/path1/path2/store/all_1_1_0/data.bin` in encrypted form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When writing the same file to `disk2`, it will actually be written to the physical disk at the path `/path1/path2/store/all_1_1_0/data.bin` in encrypted mode.
```
